DOC-13422 - The Eventing Memory Quota (DOCS-DEVEX repo) (#555)
couchbaselabs/docs-devex: modules/eventing/pages/eventing-memory-quota.adoc

= Eventing Service Memory Quota 

> :description: The Eventing Service memory quota does not enforce a hard memory limit on the Eventing subsystem, including worker processes. 

Reviewer: You're missing attributes at the top of this page. You need the `page-topic-type`, for example. 

See here: https://docs.couchbase.com/home/contribute/attributes-and-roles.html#required-document-attributes

Author: Have added it. Kindly review and let me know if this is fine.

This page explains how the memory quota actually works, how the Eventing Service distributes it across workers, and its limitations in non-containerized environments.

[abstract]

> {description}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[abstract]
{description}

This page explains how the memory quota actually works, how the Eventing Service distributes it across workers, and its limitations in non-containerized environments.
```

== About the Eventing Service Memory Quota

The Eventing Service uses the quota for:

* <<worker-queue-sizing,>>: Controls the maximum size of each worker's input queue.
* <<gc-trigger,>>: Determines when the Eventing Service invokes the JavaScript environment's GC to reclaim memory.

The memory quota is not an absolute memory cap.
The quota does not restrict the total memory consumed by JavaScript runtime heaps or Eventing processes.

> The Eventing Service divides its total memory quota uniformly across all workers in all deployed functions:

Reviewer: Can you do a pass and try to standardize on whether we're capitalizing "functions"? It should still probably be capitalized when we write "functions," same as when we write "Eventing Functions".

Author: Searched our docs and observed that when we associate functions with something like Eventing Functions or Logging Functions, we capitalize F in Functions. We also capitalize it in Headings. However when we just happen to say functions, we do not capitalize it! Will check for the same throughout the doc and maintain consistency in these docs that I have touched upon.

The per-worker quota determines the maximum size of this queue.

When the queue exceeds this size, the Eventing Service throttles the DCP stream to prevent unbounded memory growth.

Throttling temporarily pauses the mutation flow, ensuring workers do not become overwhelmed when processing lags behind the mutation rate. 

[#gc-trigger]
== Garbage Collection (GC) Triggering

The Eventing Service's garbage collection (GC) frees memory occupied by unreachable objects that are no longer in use by Eventing Functions.

Garbage collection reclaims memory only from objects that are no longer in use. 
Memory held by live objects in the JavaScript runtime heap remains allocated, so total usage may exceed the per-worker quota.

When memory usage approaches the per-worker quota limit, the JavaScript runtime may trigger garbage collection to reclaim memory. 

The garbage collector may delay the stop-the-world collection because it's optimized for throughput. 

The runtime might not reclaim memory without a delay, which can temporarily affect the Eventing Service's memory consumption.

> The Eventing Service invokes a stop-the-world JavaScript runtime garbage collection to reduce memory inside the JavaScript runtime isolate running each Eventing Function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Eventing Service invokes a stop-the-world JavaScript runtime garbage collection to reduce memory inside the JavaScript runtime isolate running each Eventing Function.

The garbage collector may delay the stop-the-world collection because it's optimized for throughput. 

The runtime might not reclaim memory without a delay, which can temporarily affect the Eventing Service's memory consumption.
```

== Limitations and Considerations

To prevent operational issues while using the Eventing Service, keep the following in mind while configuring the memory quota:

* <<no-hard-limit,>>
* <<no-enforce-c-groups,>>
* <<worker-sizing-memory,>>
* <<quota-per-worker,>>

[#no-hard-limit]
=== Not a Hard Limit

The Eventing Service memory quota does not restrict total memory usage. 

JavaScript runtime heaps may still contain live (non-garbage) objects that:

* Garbage collection cannot reclaim.
* The quota does not include.
* Continue to consume memory beyond the configured limit.

As a result, setting a memory quota does not guarantee that Eventing Functions remain within that limit.

[#no-enforce-c-groups]

> === Memory Management in Containerized vs Non-Containerized Environments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Memory Management in Containerized and Non-Containerized Environments
```

> In a non-containerised environment (for example, bare-metal servers, virtual machines, or EC2 instances), the Eventing runtime deploys 2 classes of processes, the eventing-producer and the multiple eventing-consumer processes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a non-containerized environment, such as bare-metal servers, virtual machines, or EC2 instances, the Eventing runtime deploys 2 classes of processes: 

* The eventing-producer 
* Multiple eventing-consumer processes

```

These processes effectively have no hard upper bound on memory usage. 
Collectively, these processes can consume all available system memory. 

> This can lead to unintended consequences, such as out-of-memory (OOM) conditions that might trigger the OS OOM killer and result in abrupt process termination resulting in service downtime. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can lead to unintended consequences, such as out-of-memory (OOM) conditions that might trigger the OS OOM killer. 
The OS OOM killer can cause abrupt process termination resulting in service downtime. 
```

For this reason, proper system sizing is critical and should not be overlooked. 
This includes planning total system memory as well as the number of workers configured across all Eventing functions.

> In a containerised environment, all the Eventing runtime processes like the eventing-producer and eventing-consumer, run within containers governed by cgroups with explicit memory limits. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a containerized environment, all the Eventing runtime processes, like the eventing-producer and eventing-consumer, run within containers governed by cgroups with explicit memory limits. 
```

[#quota-per-worker]
=== Quota Applies Per Worker

The memory quota does not isolate memory usage between Eventing Functions.
All workers draw from the same total memory quota.

A memory-intensive function can reduce the memory available to other Eventing Functions.

Eventing does not support per-function memory limits or reservations.

== Best Practices

Follow these recommendations to effectively manage Eventing memory usage: 

* <<monitor,>>
* <<test,>>
* <<use-cgroups,>>
* <<size,>>
* <<review,>>

[#monitor]
=== Monitor Memory Usage

* Use system-level monitoring tools to track actual memory consumption.
* Monitor memory usage for the Eventing process and individual workers.
* Configure alerts for memory thresholds well below system limits.

[#test]
=== Test in Representative Environments

* Test Eventing Functions under production-like load conditions.
* Measure actual memory consumption during peak processing.
* Validate that memory usage remains within acceptable limits.

[#use-cgroups]
=== Use cgroups for Enforcement

* Consider containerized deployments or cgroup-based memory limits in production environments.

> * Container platforms such as Docker and Kubernetes provide hard memory limits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use container platforms such as Docker and Kubernetes to provide hard memory limits.
```

> * cgroups enforce OS-level memory restrictions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use cgroups to enforce OS-level memory restrictions.
```

This approach adds a safety layer beyond the Eventing Service memory quota.

[#size]
=== Size the Memory Quota Appropriately

* Set the Eventing Service memory quota based on expected worker count and Eventing Function complexity.
* Allow additional headroom on top of the 256{nbsp}MB default for production workloads.
* Account for peak processing scenarios, not just average load.

[#review]
=== Review Function Memory Efficiency

* Optimize JavaScript code to minimize memory allocation.
* Avoid accumulating large data structures in the function scope.
* Release object references when data is no longer needed.
* Profile Eventing Functions to identify memory-intensive operations.

> == Related Links 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== See Also
```

= Eventing Service Memory Quota 
:page-topic-type: concept
:page-toclevels: 2

> :keywords: eventing, memory, quota, worker, garbage-collection
> 
> 
> :description: The Eventing Service memory quota does not enforce a hard memory limit on the Eventing subsystem, including worker processes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:page-topic-type: concept
:page-toclevels: 2
:keywords: eventing, memory, quota, worker, garbage collection, sizing
:description: The Eventing Service memory quota does not enforce a hard memory limit on the Eventing subsystem, including worker processes. 
```

Reviewer: We don't need all of the extra spaces.

= Eventing Service Memory Quota 
:page-topic-type: concept
:page-toclevels: 2
:pshintitle: Eventing Service Memory Quota

> :category: Eventing

Reviewer: @Pallavi-Janardhan where did you get these attributes from? These are not required and we don't use these.

Reviewer: Specifically `pshintitle` and `category`.

Author: I checked other Eventing docs and must have picked some from there! Also, VS Code automatically suggested some! 

Deleting them now.

Reviewer: Sorry, which documents? I have been searching in `docs-server` and `docs-devex` and I can't find any usage of these attributes. I sent you a list, I'm a little concerned that you didn't just refer to that. Please make sure to verify before you just accept AI suggestions.

Reviewer: This has not been resolved, please remove `pshintitle` and `category`. Keywords was supported - why did you remove it? 

Again, please refer to the docs team documentation that I linked you.

> :keywords: eventing,eventing-service,memory,quota,worker,garbage-collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:keywords: eventing, memory, quota, worker, garbage-collection
```

:description: The Eventing Service memory quota does not enforce a hard memory limit on the Eventing subsystem, including worker processes. 

[abstract]
{description}

This page explains how the memory quota actually works, how the Eventing Service distributes it across workers, and its limitations in non-containerized environments.

== About the Eventing Service Memory Quota

The Eventing Service uses the quota for:

* <<worker-queue-sizing,>>: Controls the maximum size of each worker's input queue.
* <<gc-trigger,>>: Determines when the Eventing Service invokes the JavaScript environment's GC to reclaim memory.

The memory quota is not an absolute memory cap.
The quota does not restrict the total memory consumed by JavaScript runtime heaps or Eventing processes.

The Eventing Service divides its total memory quota uniformly across all workers in all deployed functions:
....
Per-Worker quota = Total memory quota ÷ Total number of workers
....

> For example, if you had a memory quota of 256{nbsp}MB, with 4 total workers, each worker would use 64{nbsp}MB of memory, or 256 MB ÷ 4 workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you had a memory quota of 256{nbsp}MB, with 4 total workers, each worker would use 64{nbsp}MB of memory, or 256{nbsp}MB ÷ 4 workers.
```
